of ⁨8⁩

ProlmslonalGeographer, 37(t), t985, 75-81
9 Copyrfgfit 1985 by Association of American Geograpfiers
AN ALGORITHM TO CONSTRUCT CONTINUOUS AREA CARTOGRAMS'
James A. Dougenik Nicholas R. Chrisman Duane R. Niemeyer
Bedford, MA University of Wisconsin Reading, MA
Madison
Continuous area cartograms distort planimetric maps to produce a desired set of areas while presenting the topo
of the original map. We present a computer algorithm which achieves the result iterativety with high accuracy. T
approach uses a model of forces exerted from each polygon centroid, acting on coordinates in inverse propo
to distance. This algorithm can handle more realistic descriptions of polygon boundaries than previous algori
and manual methods, thus enhancing visual recognition. Key Words: cartograms, thematic cartography, computer
cartography, transformations, distortion of maps.
Cartograms are controversial in part because they are difficult to construct and the results
seen to date are crude or imprecise or both. They also may communicate poorly to some
audiences. Our computer algorithm attempts to redress the balance by providing a new ap-
proach to constructing precise cartograms.
Definition
A cartogram is a map purposely distorted so that its spatial properties represent quantities
not directly associated with position on the globe. As thematic maps, cartograms emphasize
the distribution of a variable by changing the area (or lengths) of objects on the map. There
are two broad categories of cartograms, linear and area [for a more complete discussion see
2]. Linear cartograms express one-dimensional quantities by altering the distance component
of maps while area cartograms use two-dimensional distortions to represent thematic infor-
mation. Since the two forms have distinct methods of construction, we will concentrate on
the area case exclusively. Within area cartograms the largest distinction concerns continuity,
they can easily be produced by sacrificing continuity and surrounding all zones with varying
amounts of blank space [i.e. 3]. Despite this alternative, the traditional form of a cartogram
remains the continuous area technique discussed as long ago as 1934 by Raisz [4]. Considering
the long-term interest in continuous area cartograms, we believe that an effective computer
algorithm to construct them is desired. Our approach maintains continuity, and preserves
many local features of cartographic lines that provide visual clues to the identity of the distorted
objects.
Ctironology of Cartogram Algorithms
The only previous publication presenting an algorithm for continuous area cartograms was
produced by Tobler in 1973 [6). He used a two step process to first fix the base map to a
continuous surface representing the thematic variable, then to project the map on that surface
onto a new plane introducing some distortion. The projection is specified by minimizing the
Jacobian determinant of the surface as an approximation of the new areas, but the new areas
relate to a cellular grid, not the original polygons. Through successive iterations involving a
quadratic function of differences between desired and actual areas, the approximation is im-
proved.
The quadratic method provides d new area for each cell, but it does not assure that the
projection is a continuous function. Tobler describes the final convergence of the method as
• The authors performed this research while employed at the Harvard tJniversity-Laboratorv tor Computer Graphics and
Spatial Analysis, The algorithm was written by Oougenik in summer o( 1981 and results were displayed as a poster at Harvard
Computer Graphics Week 1981. A draft of this paper was presented at Harvard Graphics Week 1982 Phillip Muehrcko provided
comments on a draft. The comments of the reviewers, Poh-Chin Lai and D R F. Taylor, are also gratelully ackn
Funds from the University of Wisconsin-Madison Graduate School assisted in preparing the manuscript
75
76 THE PROFESSIONAL GEOGRAPHER
slow because a topological test is needed so that cell corners do not cross cell boundaries. In
the example (a U.S. state cartogram of 1970 population) in his paper, convergence is far from
complete after 99 iterations. The areas achieved only show a correlation coefficient of .6 with
the areas intended which implies an explanation of only 36 percent of the variance. This result
shows distortion in the correct direction, but the result is a cartogram of a different variable
from the one intended.
The insufficient accuracy of Tobler's results led Chrisman to outline a new approach using
a rubber sheet distortion (7). The cartogram process was applied directly to the topological
structure of the map, not through an intermediary surface. Each polygon exerted a force on
the adjacent boundary nodes, producing a vector result, when summed for all adjacent poly-
gons, that displaced the node's position. The force was proposed to be proportional to the
signed square root of the difference between current and desired area. The square root trans-
formation converts a ratio of areas to a ratio of positions. The force was proposed to act from
a polygon center" on the nodes of that polygon's boundary. All the forces of polygons
adjacent to a node are summed to displace the node to a new location. Like Tobler, Chrisman
planned an iterative cycle with new areas and coordinates replacing the previous ones.
The Proposed Algorithm
Dougenik first attempted to implement Chrisman's ideas in 1981 and discovered difficulties
which led to the algorithm presented here. Both previous approaches produced forces acting
only on a topological neighborhood and with no concept of distance decay. Dougenik rec-
ognized the utility of force field concepts, particularly the distance decay function as applied
to electrical, gravitational or even social phenomena. The numerator of the polygon force was
defined as Chrisman did, but he introduced a denominator of distance (see formula 1). In
close proximity to a centroid, the new distance weighted force is strong. Further away it
diminishes, but the force is never ignored. The distance decay concept substitutes for the
topological locality suggested by Chrisman. The sum of all forces (from all polygons) is exerted
on each coordinate of the map causing it to be displaced. The resulting boundaries avoid
topological damage because the distortion field is smooth and twice differentiable. The overall
effect produces large distortions in shape, but the property of differentiability preserves con-
formality in each small area of the map.
F,, = 'Pi - q,' P, d,, (1)
where: F.i = force exerted by polygon j on point i
Pi = square root (actual area)/square root (n)
q, = square root (desired area)/square root (TT)
d,| = distance from centroid of j to point i
actual area is measured for a polygon and normalized by the sum of the actual areas.
desired area is the thematic variable, also normalized by its sum.
In the implementation of formula 1, other problems surfaced. When a coordinate was very
near a polygon center, the force exerted was tremendously large. An adjustment was em-
ployed, patterned on the interpolation search procedure in SYMAP where Shepard attaches a
linear function with a continuous derivative to the tail of the distance decay function (5). The
ad)ustment shown in formula 2 only attects distances less than the "radius" of the polygon.
(The term p defined above serves as a radius, considering the polygon to be as compact as
possible.)
Foi d,| greater than p, use Fornwla (1)
For d,| less than or equal to p^:
f., = (P, - q,) ( ('•p, - 3d,|)/P|) (df/pf) (2)
The adjustment in formula (2) makes the combined functions continuous and differentiable
at the point of crossover, and it also provides a zero value when the distance goes to zero.
While formula (2) provides the strength of the displacement, the direction of the vector is
determined by the line connecting the centroid to the point. A positive value ot the force
moves the point away from the centroid, and a negative force pulls towards it.
Unlike Tobler's method, this procedure makes no checks for topological boundary viola-
